What is accessablity:

Accessablity is the concept of whether a product or service can be used by everyone-however they encounter it. accessablilty isexist to aid disablity people. but desingner should accomodate all potential users in many context of use anyway to do has a firm benefits for all

A11y-accessiblity's other name:

A11y is the abbrevation a numeryon and to be exact for accessablity, where "11" represents the number of letter between the letters A and Y. Often, people in the design field use the shorthand on social media or in blogs when they refer to accessiblity-related topics and have a limited word or character count.

We can pronounce A11Y as "A-one-one-Y,""A-eleven-Y" or even as "ally," but it's best just to say "accessiblity." As with most abbreviations,A11Y is a form of jargon, so be sure to clarify its meaning upfront with any audience that might not understand it, whether in writing or verbally

Remember, when designer create prodcuts and services with accessiblity in mind, they often design better products for everyone. No matter the name ,A11Y is key to inclusive design better products for everyone. No matter the name ,A11Y is key to inclusive design.

Accessiblity vs usablitiy 

Since they have similarites, accessiblity is sometimes confused with usablitiy. Both overlap and are vital parts of user experience(UX) design, but there are also key distincitions between them. Usablitity is convcerned with whether designs are effective, efficient and satisfying to user 

The four principles of accessibility:

1) preceivable: Distinguishable adaptable via sight, hearing and/or touch.

2) Operable: Responsive to User accessiblity technologies Navigable

3) understandable : reable predictable clear labels & instructions

4) Robust: flexible compatible with a variety of mediums

Types of accessibility issues: 

You should consider the number and types of potential accessiblity issues user will have. These are common barriers:

Visual(eg color blindness)
Motor/mobility(eg., wheelchair-user concerns)
Auditory (hearing difficulties)
Seizures (especially photosensitive epilepsy)
Learning/cognitive (e.g., dyslexia)

Abiltiy barriers can also arise for any user

incidental (e.g., sleep-deprivation)
Enviromental (e.g., using a mobile device underground)

Accessible designs for everyone

cognitive & learning Disablities
Blindness low vision color-blindness 
Speech inputs
Hearing impairment
Motor & dexterity

The possibilites are virtually limitless regarding who might be trying to access your product/service.

"When UX doesn't consider all user, shouldn't it be known as 
Some User experience" or ...SUX?"


