Dieter's ram 10 principle of good Design

Good design is innovative

Whether you are making a change or dogin something in a new way,
developing new ideas or making improvments to existing design and working alongside new technology, all to these offer a multitude of oppurtunities for you to be innovative within a design.

Good design makes a produt useful

It doesn't matter how stunning a product looks if it is practically usuable as it become complete worthless. Products are not pieces of art to be admired they are there to server a purpose and solve a problem.

Good design is aesthetics

Beautiful items tend to make us feel comfortable. if a product is beautiful, you may be more inclined to use and want it. Some many argue against this point as you may have your own subjective idea of what is beautiful, and some-well designed items do prioritize over beauty. Regardless of your taste, you may like the things around you to be beautiful irrespective of how you define beauty.

Good design make product understandable

For example, handles on doors that don't indicate if they should be pushed or pulled or traps that don't indicateif they are hot or cold just leave the user confused. The opposite of this is an instantly understandable product that is completely self-explanatory and communicates what it's about, what it's for and how to use it. This saves a user from breaking the product or spending time reading through instruction manuals.

Good desing is unobtrusive

An obtrusive product is an over-designed product. Products that tend to fail are those created with the designer in mind or with presumptions of who the user might be and or how they might use it. The best products allow the user to do exaclty what they want to do. These products should also help the user to complete their intended tasks effectively and happliy. The design should not hinder the indivdual's intuitive process

Good design is honest

Good design doesn't have tricks! it doesn't pretend to be something that it isn't, and it does't try to manipulate you into buying it by making promises that can't be kept. It should always have the user's best interests in mind, so it shouldn't have to try to lie or try to be something that it isn't.

Good design is long-lasting

Design should always be through to the last details and avoud being fashionable which means that it never appear old or antiquated.

Good design is enviromentally friendly

Pollution can arise from wasted resources throughout a product's lifespan. Design shouldn't be wasteful and should save resources where it can, both physicaaly and digitally

Good design is a little as possible

Design should always be intentional. Anything that doesn't serve a purpose for that user should be excluded. With less clutter, a design will achieve more clarity for the user.

 
